<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: A Triple Best</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">A Triple Best</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“The just shall live by faith.”</p>
					<cite>Romans 1:17</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>Some time ago I came across the life-motto of George Stephenson, the “father of the locomotive,” as he has been called, the man whose brains and sagacity made possible the network of railways which spreads now over the earth. The crystallised experience of such a life is worth studying. Here, then, was Stephenson’s working formula:⁠—“Make the best of everything; think the best of everybody; hope the best for yourself.”</p>
			<p>First, <em>make the best of everything</em>. In every set of circumstances possible or conceivable, there are always, at any rate, two ways of acting. You can look for the helpful, bright, and hopeful things, and “freeze on” to these meantime. Or, you can select all the doleful, sombre aspects, and sit down in the dust with them. Now, if it did not matter which a man did, there would be no good saying any more. But it has long since become abundantly clear that the man who makes the best of his circumstances, however hard they be, comes most happily out of them in the end. In other words, it pays to make the best of things. It is the cheery people who recover quickest when they are sick. There are men who, if their house should fall in ruins about them, will contrive some sort of shelter meantime with the broken beams! That is the type that wins out in the end somehow; these are the men to whom the miracles happen⁠—who never know when they are beaten, who will face the most tremendous odds with “the half of a broken hope” for a shield, who are never done until they are dead. What makes for success or failure in a man is nothing external to him at all. It is something within him. It is the temper of his spirit. It is the way he captains his own soul.</p>
			<p>The other day I saw a photograph of a backyard. It was a little bit of a place, of the most forlorn appearance, littered with tin cans, overgrown with weeds, and hemmed round with blank walls of brick. But it came into the hands of a man who believed in making the best of things. Another photograph showed that same backyard after a year had passed. It was still as small as ever, still overlooked by high walls and surrounded by chimneys. But it was now a perfect little oasis of beauty amid a wilderness of bricks and slates. Will anybody deny that that spirit pays?</p>
			<p>Right up the scale, from little things to the highest things, the man who looks for the shining possibilities and follows them, is the man on whom, in our shortsighted way, we say that Fortune smiles. Rather, he smiles in such a determined way to Fortune, that she has at length to smile back!</p>
			<p>Nobody pretends that it is easy, when we have failed, to gather our powers together and try again. But nearly all the big men have had to do that very thing. It certainly is not easy, when you have a heavy burden of your own, to spare a cheery word or a hand of sympathy for somebody who is really much better off, but there are plenty of people doing it at this moment. Nero’s palace is the last place in this world where you would expect to find a company of loyal Christian folk. Yet there were such people there, “the saints of Caesar’s household.” And the grace of God that made that possible can achieve all these lesser wonders too.</p>
			<p>Second, <em>think the best of everybody</em>. There is a winsome legend that Jesus once revealed Himself in this way:⁠—A knot of idlers had gathered in the street round a dead dog. One remarked how mangy and unkempt its hide was. Another said, “What ugly ears!” But a stranger, who had come forward, said, “Pearls are not whiter than its teeth!” And men said to one another, “This must be Jesus of Nazareth, for nobody but He would find something good even in a dead dog.” Certainly it is the mark of the most Christlike men and women that they delight rather in emphasising the merest speck of goodness than in denouncing the too visible evil. We can, all too easily, see the fault in another. What we cannot see is the heart of the defaulter, the weight of temptation he struggled under, and his bitter inner penitence. “Granted,” as Carlyle says, “the ship comes into harbour with shrouds and tackle damaged; the pilot is blameworthy. He has not been all-wise and all-powerful. But, to know how blameworthy, tell us first whether his voyage has been round the globe, or only to Ramsgate and the Isle of Dogs.”</p>
			<p>The way to get the best out of people is to think the best about them. Let a man see that you have good hopes of him, and recognise what is best in him, and, in ways of which science can give no explanation, you add to his chances of reaching better things. In any case, who would not wish to stand on Christ’s side rather than on Judas’s. “This ointment might have been sold for three hundred pence and given to the poor.” That is Judas. “Let her alone. Why trouble ye her? She hath wrought a good work in me. She hath done what she could.” That is Jesus Christ.</p>
			<p>Third⁠—Don’t leave yourself out of the picture. <em>Hope the best for yourself.</em> George Eliot, in her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scenes of Clerical Life</i>, gives, in one chapter, an account of how the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Amos Barton is criticised and discussed in his parish. In the next chapter we see the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Amos himself going on his way blissfully unconscious of the poor opinion in which he is held, believing quite honestly in himself, and not a little proud of his abilities. “We are poor plants,” says this keen student of character, “buoyed up by the air vessels of our own conceit.” And a blessed thing, too, when you think of it! If we only knew all the disparaging remarks people make about us, we should never face up to our duties at all. What helps us along is our innocent belief in our powers, in the esteem in which we are held⁠—our little conceits, if you like. Since they send us to our tasks with more spirit, and keep us at them with more determination, aren’t they good things in their way? They are indeed just a lower form of that hope that we are speaking of⁠—Hope’s poor relations.</p>
			<p>If these are of such value, how much more pure quiet steady <b>hope</b> itself, purged of all pride and undue self-esteem? Hope the best for yourself, and you are already a good way on the road to it. Suggestion is a tremendously powerful instrument, even when you make it yourself. By self suggestion, the psychologists tell us, you can influence your actions, your character, and your general outlook in a wonderful fashion, either to your advantage or your hurt. Therefore, they say, be careful never to suggest evil to yourself. Never say to yourself, “I’m going to make a mess of this,” or “I am not fit for that.” Suggest success, happiness, health, and you beckon them to you. Hope the best for yourself, and you pave the way for its coming.</p>
			<p>On higher planes, the same holds true. Hope on, and, though you fall you will rise again. Believe that you will be enabled to face your trouble or temptation, and you will be brought through it somehow. Even when the end of life is near, hope still, for beyond this best there is a better, and God’s road winds uphill all the way.</p>
			<p>But, you say, this is just faith. I know it is. Run your hopes for yourself up as high as you can reach, and they will touch God and become faith. That is why you are to hope the best for yourself. Because⁠—God. Because God the Father loves you, and desires the best for you too. I believe in the optimism which Stephenson’s motto embodies, because I believe in the Fatherhood of God through our Lord Jesus Christ. That is why I counsel you to go on hoping that the best is yet to be. Not that we can earn it at all, or that we deserve it at all. But⁠—because God, our Father. And, for the daring and faith of that saying, this sufficient ground.⁠—Because⁠—Jesus Christ.</p>
			<div>
				<header>
					<p>Prayer</p>
				</header>
				<p>Help us all, Heavenly Father, to meet the discipline of life with stouter hearts. May we all try harder to cultivate the Christlike mark of charity. And spite of our many sins and shortcomings, and our poor love of Thee, grant us the courage to believe that all things, in Thy great Love for us, are working together for our good. We ask it for Jesus’ sake. Amen.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
