<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: God’s Door of Hope</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">God’s Door of Hope</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“The valley of Achor for a door of hope.”</p>
					<cite>Hosea 25:15</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The world has a scheme of redemption of its own, and men can themselves do something for the brother who has fallen. But the plan involves, invariably, a change of surroundings. Worldly wisdom says, of the youth who is making a mess of his life, “Ship him off to the colonies, try him with a new start on another soil.” But the grace of God promises a far more wonderful salvation. It makes possible a new start on the very spot of the old failure. It leads a man back to the scene of his old disloyalty, and promises him a new memory that shall blot out and redeem the old. God does not take the depressed and discouraged out of their surroundings. He adds an inward something that enables them to conquer where they stand. It is not some new untried sphere that God gilds with promise. It is the old place where one has already failed and fallen. It is the valley of Achor, the scene of Israel’s defeat, and Achan’s shame and sin, that God gives to His people as a door of hope.</p>
			<p>In Italian history, during the Middle Ages, the republics of Pisa and Genoa were often at war, and at one time the Genoese were badly beaten in a sea-fight near the little island of Meloria. Some years after, a Genoese admiral took his fleet to that same spot and said, “Here is the rock which a Genoese defeat has made famous. A victory would make it immortal.” And sure enough, the fight that followed ended in a great victory for Genoa. It is that sort of hope that God holds out to all defeated souls who put their trust in Him. He points us back to our valley of Achor, the place with a memory we do not like to think of, and He says, There is your door of Hope, Go back and try again. And those who go back in His strength are enabled to write a new memory upon the old shame.</p>
			<p>Our Lord and Master is very gracious to forgive us when we come to Him in penitence to tell Him of the position we have lost by our faithlessness or our cowardice, but He does not consent to the ultimate defeat of the very feeblest of His soldiers. “Go back and try again,” is His order. There are many, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Matheson says, who offer us a golden tomorrow, but it is only Christ who enables us to retrieve our yesterday. For His grace is more than forgiveness. It is the promise to reverse the memory of Achor, to turn defeat into victory even yet.</p>
			<p>Achor, further, literally means Trouble, and it is a great thing for us when we have learned that even there God has for us a door of hope.</p>
			<p>The valley of Trouble is perhaps the last place in the world where the uninstructed would look for any fruit of harvest, and yet again and again men have brought the fairest flowers of character and holiness out of it. How many a devout and useful servant of Christ owes the beginning of his allegiance to a serious illness, to some crippling disappointment, to an overwhelming sorrow? In all humility there are many who can say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, and there are many, many more about whom their friends often quote that text.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“I walked a mile with Pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She chattered all the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But left me none the wiser</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all she had to say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I walked a mile with Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ne’er a word said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh, the things I learned from her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Sorrow walked with me!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>There is a door of Hope even in the valley of Trouble, and those who tread it in God’s company shall not fail to find it.</p>
			<p>There is one other class who need to know that even in Achor there is a door of hope, the depressed and discouraged. Phillips Brooks once declared, “I came near doing a dreadful thing the other day. I was in East Boston and I suddenly felt as if I must get away from everything for a while. I went to the Cunard dock and asked if the steamer had sailed. She had been gone about an hour. I believe if she had still been there, I should have absconded.” I wonder if there is anyone who has not known that feeling? When duty is dull, and circumstances discouraging, when we seem to be merely ploughing the sands, “Oh,” we say, “for the wings of a dove!” Comfort and happiness and salvation seem to lie solely in escape. And it may be that they do. But more often the trouble is in ourselves, and would travel with us to the new post.</p>
			<p>If there be any depressed or discouraged reading these lines, I should like to remind them of God’s promise to give the valley of Achor⁠—that is the depressing scene of your labours, my brother⁠—for a door of hope. You are looking for your hope somewhere else, anywhere else provided it be out of your present rut and drudgery. In reality your door of hope lies in the rut, in the valley itself. It is not escape you need. It is just a braver faith that God is in your valley with you, and that He needs you there.</p>
			<p>Take a firmer grip of that, and go back to where you serve, and you will find, please God, that even in your valley He has opened for you a door of Hope and Gladness.</p>
			<p>May all those who are living and working these days in the valley of Achor find in it somewhere God’s Door of Hope.</p>
			<section data-parent="chapter-22" id="chapter-22-prayer" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>Prayer</p>
				</header>
				<p>Grant us, O God, the faith that in Thy strength we can yet succeed even in the place where we have failed. Teach us that it is Thy whisper we hear, when we have fallen into Despond, bidding us rise and try again. And grant us the courage to be sure, since Thou hast a tryst to meet and help us there, that even our Achor shall open to us its door of hope. Amen.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
