<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: The God of the Unlovable Man</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
				<h2>XIX</h2>
				<p>The God of the Unlovable Man</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote>
					<em>"The God of Jacob is our refuge."</em>
					<cite>(PSALM xlvi. 11.)</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
<p>There is a phrase which echoes through the Old Testament like the
refrain of some solemn music--the "God of Jacob."  "The God of Jacob,"
says the 46th Psalmist, "is our refuge."  Yet when you think of it, it
is a strange title.  The "God of Abraham" you can understand, for
Abraham was a great and faithful soul.  And the "God of Isaac," also,
for Isaac was a saint.  But the "God of Jacob" is a combination of
ideas of a very different sort.  For though, by God's grace, Jacob
became a saint in the end, it took much discipline and trouble to mould
him into a true godliness.  And, for the greater part of his life, and
many of his appearances on the stage of Scripture, his actions and
ideals are not such as to make us admire him very passionately.  We
like Esau for all his faults, but we do not like Jacob for all his
virtues.  There is something cold and calculating about Jacob that
repels affection.  For all his religion, the Jacob of the earlier
chapters is a mean soul, successful but unscrupulous, pious but not
straight, spiritually-minded but not lovable.  And yet the Almighty
condescends to be known as the God of Jacob, and the Bible loves that
name for God!</p>
<p>What does that say to you?  To me it says this--and I think we all need
to learn it--that God is the God even of unlovable people!  That even
unlovable people have a God!  That the Lord is very gracious to
sinners, we all rejoice to believe, for that is the Evangel of Jesus,
and He Himself was found practising it even among the waifs and
outcasts of society.  But that unlovable people have a God, too, is
actually harder for us to realise, for the plain fact is that
unlovable, disagreeable people irritate and annoy us more even than the
sinners.  If you question that, just analyse your attitude to the
Prodigal in our Lord's wonderful story, compared with that toward his
respectable, cold-hearted and priggish elder brother.  The brother
irritates us.  We call him, with some heat, as Henry Drummond did, a
baby, and we want to shake him.  But we never want to shake the
prodigal.</p>
<p>Now, we all have, on our list of acquaintances, people whom we have
labelled disagreeable, who continually rub us the wrong way, as we put
it.  There is the man who is always talking about himself, and is
filled with conceit like a bladder with air.  "There is the man," says
Hazlitt in one of his Essays, "who asks you fifty questions as to the
commonest things you advance, and, you would sooner pardon a fellow who
held a pistol at your breast and demanded your money."  There is the
ill-tempered, sulky person, and the grumbling, whining, dolorous soul
never without an ache or a grievance.  So we can all draw up our own
private "Index Expurgatorius" of the people we bar or dislike.  We say
these people are unlovable.</p>
<p>And, since the corruption of the best is the worst, we are agreed that
the most unlovable of all types is the religious undesirable, the smug,
unctuous, oily person, for example, whose sincerity is continually in
question, the narrow, intolerant, little soul who cannot see any sort
of truth or righteousness except his own, or the prim and pious man who
is cocksure of his interest in the life to come, but is not straight in
the affairs of the life which now is.  There are others, but
enumeration is not a very profitable or a pleasant task.  Take them all
together, gather them in a crowd in your memory, and then set yourself
this exercise for your sanctification and growth in grace.  Realise
that the Lord your God is the God also of these unlovable people.  Get
that idea thoroughly into your heart, and say it to yourself, if need
be, many times a day.  These people look up to Him in worship just as
you do.  They have their sacred hours in His presence just as you have.
There is nothing you look for to God, that they do not seek, too, from
Him.  They are not of a different order from you, but the same order.
And though you do not love them, God does.  Though they are outside of
your circle, they are not outside of His.  The God of Jacob is their
God.  And therein lies for them, as it did for Jacob, the hope and
promise of better things to come.</p>
<p>If we remembered that, should we not be more patient and forbearing
with them than we are, keener to look for the best in them, and to make
the best of them than we are?  Just to think of what is meant by the
"God of Jacob" is to set our sharp and bitter judgments of others over
against the infinitely tender compassion and patience and longsuffering
of God.  All the wonder of the divine grace is hidden in the phrase.
And this is the wonder--that God never grows tired even of disagreeable
people.  He does not give up caring even for the unlovable.  But oh!
what poor sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty <em>we</em> are, with our
quick, rash final judgments and our hard, unbrotherly hearts!</p>
<p>Did you ever ask yourself what some of these unlovable people are
doing, the while you and I are telling each other how impossible and
unlovable they are?  George Eliot suggests it somewhere thus:--"While
we are coldly discussing a man's career, sneering at his mistakes, and
labelling his opinions 'Evangelical and narrow' or 'Latitudinarian and
pantheistic,' or 'Anglican and supercilious,' that man in his solitude
is perhaps shedding hot tears because his sacrifice is a hard one,
because strength and patience are failing him to speak the difficult
word and do the difficult deed."  Ah, yes, it's a mercy that there is a
God even for unlovable people!</p>
<p>But there is a question that has been waiting all this time, and we
must ask it before we close.  <em>What about ourselves, you and me</em>?  Are
we such lovable people that we can afford to judge others?  Do we never
rub our friends the wrong way, and, without meaning it, annoy and
disappoint and repel them?  Are <em>our</em> religious profession and our
daily practice so very much in keeping that we may talk about prigs and
self-righteous people as if they belonged to an entirely different
world?  May I speak for you all and say humbly "No"?  No, God knows
they are not!  The fact is that if we know ourselves at all well, we
must be aware that we have it in us to be quite as disagreeable and
selfish and self-righteous as anybody.  It is only our best beloved who
do not get tired of us, and sometimes even they must be hard put to it.</p>
<p>But there is a blessed Gospel for those who have made that discovery
about themselves.  There is a God of Jacob.  Abraham is too high for
us, and Isaac is too saintly, but Jacob, faulty, disappointing,
unlovable, yet by God's grace redeemed and perfected at last, Jacob is
the man for us!  The hope and comfort of all who have learned what they
really are is that "the God of Jacob is our refuge."</p>
<header>
<p>PRAYER</p>
</header>
<p>Bring us, we pray Thee, O God, into a truer knowledge of ourselves.
Make us to learn how frail we are, how poor and blind and naked; to the
end we may regard with due charity the shortcomings of others, and may
worthily praise Thy great Mercy, who yet hast not turned away Thy face
from us.  For Jesus' sake.  Amen.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
